Citation: Heinonen, H.; Burova, A.;
Siltanen, S.; Lähteenmäki, J.;
Hakulinen, J.; Turunen, M.
Evaluating the Beneﬁts of
Collaborative VR Review for
Maintenance Documentation and
Risk Assessment. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12,
7155. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app12147155
Academic Editor: Shana Smith
Received: 29 May 2022
Accepted: 12 July 2022
Published: 15 July 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences
Article
Evaluating the Beneﬁts of Collaborative VR Review for
Maintenance Documentation and Risk Assessment
Hanna Heinonen 1,*
, Alisa Burova 2,*
, Sanni Siltanen 1, Jussi Lähteenmäki 1,
Jaakko Hakulinen 2,†
and Markku Turunen 2
1
KONE Corporation, Myllykatu 3, 05830 Hyvinkää, Finland; sanni.siltanen@kone.com (S.S.);
jussi.lahteenmaki@kone.com (J.L.)
2
Faculty of Information Technology and Communication Sciences, Tampere University,
33014 Tampere, Finland; jaakko.hakulinen@tuni.ﬁ(J.H.); markku.turunen@tuni.ﬁ(M.T.)
*
Correspondence: hanna.heinonen@kone.com (H.H.); alissa.burova@tuni.ﬁ(A.B.)
†
This author has passed away.
Featured Application: Based on data from a globally operating industrial company, this study demon-
strated the benefits of VR to maintenance documentation review and risk assessment processes.
Abstract: Technical documentation creation is a collaborative process involving several departments
in R&D. Even though virtual reality (VR) has been demonstrated to facilitate industrial collaboration
and advance the product development lifecycle in earlier studies, it has not been utilized for technical
documentation review and risk assessment processes in industrial companies. This article presents a
case study where the beneﬁts of VR to maintenance documentation reviews and risk assessments
were studied. The virtual reality environment was tested by nine domain experts from an industrial
company in a user study that replicated their actual real-life industrial collaboration tasks. Both
qualitative and quantitative data were collected during the study. Our ﬁndings show that collab-
orative VR has the potential to enhance the documentation review and risk assessment processes.
Overall, the concept of using virtual reality for documentation review and risk assessment processes
was rated positively by participants, and even though further development is needed for the review
tools, VR was viewed as a concept that facilitates collaboration, enhances the current review practices,
and increases spatial understanding. The beneﬁts of VR are evident, especially for geographically
scattered teams that rarely meet face-to-face or do not have access to the actual physical equipment. In
cases where traditional means of communication are not enough, process improvements are needed
for documentation review and risk assessment processes, and our proposed solution is VR.
Keywords: virtual reality; technical documentation; maintenance method development; risk assessment;
collaborative VR; industrial maintenance
1. Introduction
For many industrial companies, the maintenance business is growing in importance,
and more focus is paid to providing support and technical instructions to the maintenance
technicians on the ﬁeld. Industrial maintenance tasks are often complicated, and technicians
need instructions to perform the tasks in a safe and efﬁcient manner.
KONE Corporation is a global leader in the elevator and escalator industry [1]. KONE
operates in more than 60 countries with approximately 30,000 ﬁeld employees. KONE
publishes hundreds of new or revised maintenance instructions each year to support its
service business. As the safety and accuracy of technical instructions are essential to the
company, there is no room for ambiguity or misunderstandings in the instructions delivered
to the ﬁeld. To achieve this, KONE has been developing both the practices and processes
for maintenance instruction creation and the digital channels for technical information
delivery to ﬁeld employees.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12147155
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
2 of 20
Technical documentation creation is a collaborative process involving several depart-
ments, including technical documentation, subject matter, and risk assessment experts.
While the technical documentation experts prepare the drafts, the subject matter and risk
assessment experts validate the content in reviews. Both the preparation of the draft and
its review are equally important in the development of a technical instruction.
The review of maintenance instructions calls for the collaboration of technical docu-
mentation, maintenance method development and risk assessment. Preferably, this review
is performed so that all the parties are in the same location and have access to both the
equipment and instructions. However, due to the lack of access to the physical equipment
and difﬁculties in remote communication between globally distributed teams and depart-
ments, these reviews are in many cases carried out by technical documentation experts
sending out PDF ﬁles or links to review portals and subject matter experts commenting on
them remotely. This trend was further accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic and related
restrictions when people from the same location were also forced to work remotely from
home. Therefore, instead of an interactive collaborative process, the review becomes a
process where the parties work in isolation. Because the work is carried out individually,
the reviewers might send conﬂicting review comments, or some questions might be left
unanswered altogether.
In most of the existing technical communication literature and guidelines used in
companies, documentation reviews are discussed at a fairly abstract level and the focus
is on different types of checklists, tips, and best practices. For example, Hackos and
Jayaprakash discuss the importance of reviews, both technical reviews and peer reviews,
their effect on the quality of documentation, and the parties that should be involved in
the review process [2,3]. However, the technical communication literature does not go
into detail on how reviews should be physically arranged, especially in globally operating
companies. Similarly, risk assessment is generally guided by regulations that do not discuss
the actual best practices of risk assessments or the physical setup.
Some research has been conducted for evaluating the use of novel technologies, such
as virtual reality (VR) for the technical documentation creation process [4], but their use
has not been implemented in practice in industrial companies. Furthermore, even though
the use of VR has proven efﬁcient for engineering design review [5], VR has not, until
now, been studied or utilized for technical documentation reviews and risk assessments,
processes that have much in common with engineering design reviews. As VR has been
proven to be an effective tool to aid collaboration and cooperation [6], it would also be a
good ﬁt for technical documentation reviews and risk assessments as both processes are
inherently very collaborative.
The work described in this paper contributes to the research in the ﬁelds of virtual real-
ity applications in industrial systems and technical communication. The study investigates
the potential of VR as a collaborative review and risk assessment platform and speciﬁcally
addresses the following research question:
RQ: What are the beneﬁts of collaborative virtual reality to maintenance documentation
reviews and risk assessments in industrial companies?
To address the research question, we conducted user tests with domain experts that
are representative of the intended users of the VR system. A total of nine users from KONE
Corporation tested the VR environment and gave their feedback on the usefulness and
beneﬁts of the system for technical documentation reviews and risk assessments. The tasks
performed during the user testing were designed to replicate an actual review and risk
assessment of a maintenance method and instructions related to a product from KONE.
Even though this study is focused on a single industrial company’s documentation and
risk assessment processes, the documentation review and risk assessment are universal
collaborative processes that are very similar in other industrial companies. Therefore, this
case study is representative of the generic maintenance documentation review and risk
assessment processes used in many industrial companies.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
3 of 20
2. Background
In this section, we ﬁrstly introduce VR as a technology to facilitate collaboration
and demonstrate its application cases and resulting advantages in the industrial context.
Then, we provide a more detailed background for areas that are relevant to this case
study, including industrial maintenance, the maintenance documentation process, and risk
assessment. In industrial maintenance, it is essential that maintenance tasks are performed
in an optimal and safe way, and maintenance methods are, therefore, carefully designed,
authored, tested, documented, and risk assessed. Even though these processes in industrial
companies’ R&D are inherently collaborative in nature, collaborative VR has not, until now,
been utilized to enhance these processes in industrial companies.
2.1. Collaborative VR
The application of VR to industrial needs has been investigated for several decades,
showing the potential to aid, enhance and transform many of industrial tasks and pro-
cesses [7,8]. With a given ﬂexibility to simulate dangerous contexts and enable natural
interactions with virtual objects in immersive virtual environments [7,9–11], VR has been
successfully applied in industry to facilitate training [12,13], AR-prototyping [14,15] as well
as different phases of product development cycle [7,16–19].
“Distributed virtual environments” [20], also widely referred as collaborative VR
(CVR), have become especially in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic, when people
all over the globe were forced to work remotely. The major advantage of collaborative VR is
the possibility to blur geographical barriers and immerse people from diverse locations into
shared working spaces [21], addressing the needs of multidisciplinary global collaboration.
Due to the increased feel of presence and immersion together with the ability to commu-
nicate verbally and non-verbally, collaboration in VR is understood as more efﬁcient and
ﬂexible than the collaboration via traditional conferencing tools. Evidence has shown that
VR is capable of positively affecting the elements of remote communication, such as the
clarity and richness of communicated information, and enhance the quality of discussion
and knowledge transfer due to shared context and awareness of others [22–24].
A case study by Berg et al. [16], for instance, demonstrated the application of VR to
support early design decision making, which resulted in escalation of identiﬁed design
issues and provided solutions, in addition to increased sense of team engagement and
participation in the collaboration process. Furthermore, a recent study demonstrated that
real-time collaboration over multi-user VR leads to increased performance in comparison
to the traditional approach [25]. The studies by Wolfartsberger et al. [17,26], which ex-
plored the use of VR to aid the collaborative design review process, concluded that VR
technology is a “useful addition, and not a replacement”, which potentially accelerates
the process and ensures inclusion of all professional groups. Other studies reported that
collaboration in VR may strengthen lean and agile practices [27–30], optimizing value cre-
ation and team performance, while reducing resource waste and time span. Furthermore,
collaboration in VR supports the innovation mindset of employees and overall sustain-
ability [31], whereas VR itself is recognized as motivating and engaging technology by
industrial employees [12,14].
2.2. Industrial Maintenance and Maintenance Documentation
Industrial maintenance aims at keeping machinery running and in good condition.
Companies have different maintenance strategies; in the era of data analytics, the trend is
towards preventive and condition-based maintenance. Complete optimization of material
and workforce costs both per visit and over the equipment lifecycle, increasing equipment
uptime, and avoiding risk of breakdown have transformed the nature of maintenance visits.
Where earlier it was typical to have predetermined maintenance visits with predeﬁned
task lists, modern service companies use real-time sensor data to monitor the condition of
the machinery and artiﬁcial intelligence to deﬁne the optimal time for each maintenance
task to be performed. This means that the content of each maintenance visit is different,
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
4 of 20
and the composition of tasks varies across the visits. Thus, maintenance technicians need
instructions on what to do as they cannot rely on their experience or tacit knowledge as
before. Because of the quest for ﬁnancial optimization, it is equally important to instruct
what not to do on the visit.
Regardless of the maintenance strategy and how the composition of tasks for each
maintenance visit is determined, it is important that maintenance tasks are performed in an
optimal and safe way. Therefore, maintenance methods are carefully designed, authored,
tested, documented, and risk assessed.
Technical communication is a ﬁeld that conveys technical or specialized information,
uses technology to communicate, or provides instructions on how to do something [32].
The maintenance documentation process is a subcategory of the more generic technical
documentation process [33,34], and the outcome of the maintenance documentation process
is a set of maintenance instructions that help the end users, maintenance technicians,
complete their tasks in an efﬁcient and safe manner. The content creation process is
inherently collaborative, where people from different departments are working together
to achieve a common goal. The process starts from maintenance method and outline
creation by maintenance method developers. The outline is then passed on to the technical
documentation experts, who start working on a draft. The draft instructions are developed
iteratively with the maintenance method developers, by reviewing and revising. When
both parties are satisﬁed with the draft, the maintenance method and the safety of the
instructions are evaluated with the help of risk assessment experts. If the risk assessment
ﬁnds deﬁciencies in the instruction or the method behind the instruction, they are revised
and reviewed again until the requirements for safety are satisﬁed. Finally, the instructions
are ofﬁcially checked and approved by the organization, and then published into relevant
delivery channels. See Figure 1 for an overview of the maintenance documentation process.
Figure 1. Maintenance documentation process.
From the technical point of view, the process of documentation review has remained
the same for the past years. Even though the use of VR for the technical documentation
process has been studied [4], the use of novel technologies, such as VR, has not been
implemented for the review and risk assessment of technical instructions in industrial
companies. Typically, technical instruction reviews and risk assessments are carried out by
sending out links to PDF ﬁles or online review portals. If all participants are located on the
same site, a face-to-face meeting can be arranged, but global teams rarely have the option
of doing this. In practice, meetings are held in conferencing tools, such as Microsoft Teams,
or, more often, reviewers comment on the PDF ﬁle and send it back to documentation
experts via email or ﬁle sharing systems. In many cases, the teams have to work without
any access to the actual product. As the development cycle in industrial companies is
short, the technical instructions have to be completed in an increasingly short time frame,
often before any actual prototypes exist [4]. Furthermore, even if a prototype exists, it is
usually located on one site only and not accessible to everybody, especially in the case of
globally scattered teams. In a conference call, even when a 3D model is shown via screen
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
5 of 20
share, spatial understanding is missing and explaining product proportions and features is
difﬁcult, if not impossible. To combat these problems, process improvements are needed for
documentation review and risk assessment, and our proposed solution to these challenges
is VR.
2.3. Risk Assessment and Codes and Standards
The lifetime use of machinery, including the phases of transport, assembly, operation,
adjustment, maintenance, dismantling, disabling and scrapping, must be safe. This is a
legal requirement in, for example, European regulations [35,36].
While the regulations and, for example, the European harmonized standard EN
13015 [37] for maintenance instructions of lifts and escalators do not give explicit require-
ments when and how the safety risk assessment should be carried out, there are certain
standards to follow. ISO 12100 [38] gives generic guidance on how a risk assessment
should be carried out. For lifts under lifts directive and for escalators under machinery
directive, there is an international standard ISO 14798 [39] that provides a well-deﬁned risk
assessment methodology to follow.
When creating solutions or services, risk assessments can be performed in VR in differ-
ent phases of the solution creation process, from assessing the initial concept to assessing
ﬁnal designs with prototype and piloting feedback. There are studies on risk assessing
designs from user safety point of view [40,41], some concentrating on ergonomics [42].
The use of VR has also been studied for training [43]. The psychological risk-taking
decision process is discussed in de-Juan-Ripoll et al.’s work [44], recommending that VR
enhanced with physiological measurements is further studied for assessing attitudes to
risk, risk perception, and conditioning factors. Using VR for delivering safety training has
been studied in Leder et al.’s work [45], considering the impacts of VR on risk perception,
learning, and decision making.
To build on these, technical documentation needs to provide accurate information
for a solution or service, including important safety related information. Thus, technical
documentation itself can be considered a subject for risk assessment. When risk assessing
technical instructions, risk assessment experts check the tasks described in the instructions
for any unsafe methods. They sometimes also request that warnings are added to the
instructions to mitigate risks. They might recommend a different way of performing a task
or safety measures that need to be carried out before or after the task to prevent injury to
people or damage to equipment. After the risk assessment, the instructions are deemed to
be safe to be published and used by ﬁeld employees.
Even though the use of VR has been studied for several areas of risk assessment, until
now, there are no studies that evaluate the beneﬁts of VR to risk assess the contents of
technical instructions.
3. Materials and Methods
In this section, we detail an exploratory user study, which is the third iteration round
of a project that investigates the application of VR for technical documentation creation
purposes. The previous iterations were focused on the early phases of documentation
creation [46–48], while in this work, we demonstrate how VR can be used for collaborative
technical documentation reviews and risk assessments. The focus of this study is not on
the development of a VR platform but evaluating the usefulness and beneﬁts of VR for the
case study.
3.1. Methodological Proposal—Workﬂow
The aim of our study was to investigate the application of collaborative VR in an area
where it has not studied earlier, maintenance documentation review and risk assessment.
Both of these processes are very collaborative but in reality, especially in globally operating
companies, people involved often do not get to meet face-to-face or have access to the
equipment, which complicates the processes.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
6 of 20
We propose that collaborative VR is a good ﬁt to tackle these challenges in technical
documentation reviews and risk assessments. Instead of meeting in conference calls or
working individually by studying 3D models from computer screens and commenting on
PDF ﬁles, we propose that the experts involved in the process use collaborative VR to meet
each other, study the virtual equipment, demonstrate the maintenance method, review the
related maintenance instructions, and assess if there are any risks involved in the tasks
described in the instructions.
3.2. Implementation: VR Platform for Industrial Collaboration
The VR platform used in the user study, COVE-VR, was designed based on the input
of subject matter experts and evaluated in collaboration between industrial and academic
researchers [46] in several iterations and scenarios [46–48]. The following two virtual
environments (Lab and Showroom) were deployed to facilitate a wide scope of industrial
tasks: (1) a small-sized Lab replicates the realistic context of an elevator shaft based on a
3D CAD model and (2) a Showroom is a larger space to facilitate collaboration of multiple
multidisciplinary teams and in-depth investigation of 3D CAD models that would not be
possible to perform in a smaller space. To accomplish industrial tasks in VR, the users can
utilize virtual tools that are opened from a wrist menu, which is the main menu of the
platform. It is visualized as a circle menu around the user’s wrist and opened when the
user is hovering their ﬁnger over the controller’s touchpad. When a user is opening their
wrist menu, the menu is not visible to other users, but any virtual tool opened from the
menu is visible to all users working in the VR. Additionally, all the components in the VR
environment are visible to all users.
The users are visualized as simplistic avatars with a name label as shown in Figure 2;
the voice icon appears over the avatar when the user is talking. Users can view each
other as avatars, working in the VR and interacting with the components in VR. The users
are able to locomote in the VR by moving in the physical space or by teleporting in the
VR environment.
Figure 2. Screenshot of collaborative review of technical documentation in VR. A user is immersed in
VR and looking at the avatars of two other users, complete with name labels for identiﬁcation.
In this article, we provide a description of the virtual tools that are available in the VR
environment used in the study and relevant for the “review of technical documentation”
scenario. First of all, technical documentation can be opened in VR with the DocPanel tool;
it reads XML ﬁles and visualizes maintenance methods and technical instructions in the
form of text and graphics over a ﬂoating window that users can view and control in the
VR (see Figure 2). The XML ﬁles have been created in the company content management
system (CMS), exported from the CMS, and stored in the VR computer. The instructions
can then be loaded to the DocPanel from a menu. Once the instruction is loaded to the
DocPanel, it shows the task step by step, and the user may jump between pages, move
the panel freely in the virtual environment, and place it in a comfortable spot for the users
immersed in the VR. The concept of the DocPanel as a ﬂoating window was adopted from
a preceding study [14], where it was used to visualize maintenance instructions for in-ﬁeld
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
7 of 20
AR guidance and to test it in VR. The DocPanel tool is available to all users in the VR.
Once a user has opened the instruction in the DocPanel, all the users in VR can view it and
control the DocPanel and its functionalities.
In addition, previously tested [46–48] TextBox, Camera and Measure tools can be used as
supportive tools during the review. With the TextBox tool, a user can input text via speech
recognition (English or Finnish) or a virtual keyboard. The camera tool can be used to take
pictures and videos in the VR environment, and the measure tool to take measurements of
the dimensions and distances of the components in the VR environment. All generated
digital content (e.g., text sequence, pictures, and videos) are saved to a storage folder, which
can be further accessed via the desktop.
3.3. Case Study
This article describes a case study that was designed to test the usefulness and beneﬁts
of virtual reality for the maintenance documentation review and risk assessment process.
The goal of the study was to explore if collaborative VR can enhance the company processes
and collaboration of globally scattered teams. To address the research question, the VR
scenario was tested by domain experts of KONE Corporation, a globally operating leader
in the elevator and escalator industry, in a user study that replicates the actual real-life
industrial collaboration tasks related to maintenance documentation reviews and risk
assessments, both at KONE and other industrial companies.
3.3.1. User Study Procedure and Task Description
The virtual reality environment was tested by participants from three different depart-
ments that collaborate in the maintenance documentation process, including documenta-
tion, maintenance method development, and risk assessment. In the user test, each of the
participants had their own dedicated role related to the actual department they work in at
the company. The test participants were requested to work with a maintenance instruction
displayed in the DocPanel tool (see Figure 3) and interact with the components in the VR
environment. The instruction described a battery replacement task for a component, involv-
ing the removal of the battery and its cabling, installation of a new battery and reconnection
of its cables and all the safety information related to the tasks. The documentation expert
was responsible for leading the review, controlling the DocPanel tool and taking notes with
the TextBox tool. Both virtual keyboard and speech-to-text functionalities were available to
the users, and they could use both features according to their preferences. The maintenance
method expert acted as the subject matter expert, reviewing the technical details of the in-
structions, and clarifying any open issues with the component or the maintenance method.
The maintenance method export demonstrated the maintenance method by, for example,
opening the cover of the component and removing the battery. The documentation and
maintenance method expert then reviewed the draft instructions and noted down any
missing information or need for additional illustrations to be generated. When the parties
agreed that an additional illustration should be added, the documentation expert used the
camera tool to take a picture to help with the creation of the illustration that would take
place after the review. While the other parties reviewed the technical correctness of the
instructions, the risk assessment expert reviewed the safety of the working environment
and the maintenance method. If the risk assessment expert noticed any deﬁciencies in the
safety information in the reviewed instructions, they commented on it to the other users,
and the users then proceeded to discuss what type of warnings, for example, would need
to be included in the instructions. The documentation expert then noted down the ﬁnal
decision of what needs to be added with the TextBox tool.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
8 of 20
Figure 3.
Task step visualized in the DocPanel Tool (left), the same step in the original PDF
instruction (right).
During the test, the participants were encouraged to interact with each other and
utilize the tools available in the VR environment (TextBox, Camera and Measure). The
participants were also encouraged to comment on the functionalities of the tools and
their suitability for the tasks they were responsible for. Thinking aloud and participant
observation were used as the methods for collecting the data. The participants were asked
to think aloud while performing the tasks, thus enabling the observers to understand
what they liked and disliked. Thinking aloud also made it clear to the observers if the
participants had trouble using the system or understanding some functionalities. The
sessions were video recorded so that observers could go back and check details after the
user tests if needed.
3.3.2. User Study Setup
In each session, three user study participants were located in different rooms, each
wearing a VR head-mounted display. Two HTC Vive and one HP Reverb VR sets were
used. One on-site facilitator was present in each of the three rooms to provide assistance
and ensure the safety of the participants. The user study procedure was moderated by one
of the on-site facilitators via Microsoft Teams on a laptop, connecting with the participants,
asking them to accomplish the tasks, and encouraging their full participation in the tests.
Teams established an audio connection between the rooms; the audio from the VR sets was
muted so there was no interference with the audios. Teams also streamed the video of the
physical space of the main facilitator and the participants from two rooms. The VR view
from one user test participant was also streamed to Teams; the VR computer was used for
sharing this stream.
The user study was observed by three observers; two were present on site observing
the participants, and one was observing the procedure remotely with the Teams video
stream. Observers were watching for certain behaviors and taking notes on the things that
they observed the participants doing. The user study setup and the view of the Teams
streams can be observed in Figure 4.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
9 of 20
Figure 4. User study setup, showing both the video streams in Teams and the setups of the rooms
and locations.
The user study participants were immersed in VR, and the Teams stream was not
visible to them; it was only used for audio and observation purposes. The Teams sessions
were recorded for future reference. Figures 5 and 6 show user tests in progress.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
10 of 20
 
Figure 5. User tests in progress. Laptop streaming the participant’s VR view can be observed in the
background. An USB camera is connected to the laptop in the background, streaming the physical
space of the room to Teams.
 
Figure 6. User test participant and VR view displayed in a monitor.
The test setup, researchers’ roles as well as the instructions and tasks for the partic-
ipants were tested in a separate pretest session. Based on the learnings from the pretest,
some modiﬁcations were made. For example, in the VR environment, the participant names
and department were added above each avatar to make it easier to recognize participants
in VR. Some details of the tasks for the participants were also modiﬁed to bring clarity to
the test sessions. After the pretest, no modiﬁcations were made between actual user tests;
thus, they were all equal.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
11 of 20
3.3.3. User Study Participants
Three user test sessions of the collaborative review process were held in the COVE-VR
platform. In each of the sessions, we had three participants, i.e., one subject matter expert
from each of the departments involved, including maintenance method development,
technical documentation, and risk assessment. This makes a total of nine experts (aged from
34 to 64 (M = 49); seven males and two females). All participants had a university degree,
six bachelors and three master’s degrees. On average, their experience at their role was
9.5 years, with a minimum at 2 and maximum at 21 years. Four experts had already been
included in the process of testing COVE-VR in earlier studies; two of them had participated
in all of the iterations and two were partly involved. Our test participants were carefully
selected as they have high domain-speciﬁc expertise from the three ﬁelds; therefore, their
opinions carry considerable weight for evaluating the beneﬁts of collaborative VR for
documentation review and risk assessment.
3.3.4. Collected Data and Analysis
Both qualitative and quantitative data were collected during the study. The quanti-
tative data were collected via pre and post online surveys, created with the LimeSurvey
tool. The validated evaluation method SUXES was used to collect user experience and
analyze differences in expectations and actual experiences with the VR environment [49].
As SUXES captures both the expectations and the actual experiences of the user, one can
measure the gap between the metrics and compare them, therefore providing a method to
understand the user experience [49].
In the pre-survey (the ﬁrst part of SUXES), participants evaluated their expectations
based on an introductory video of the VR system shown to them. The post-survey had
ﬁve sections with the statements answered on a 7-point Likert scale, where 1 = strongly
disagree and 7 = strongly agree. The survey evaluated the participants’ actual experiences
with the system (the second part of SUXES), views of the DocPanel tool, the perception of
collaborative review sessions in VR, and perception of VR technology in general. In this
paper, we use data from four sections of the surveys (both parts of the SUXES, the DocPanel
tool, and collaborative review); data from the ﬁfth section (perception of VR technology in
general) has been published in another study.
After each user test session was completed, the main facilitator conducted a semi-
structured group interview. Discussion revolved around topics such as general feelings
and attitudes towards the tested system, participants’ evaluation of the system as a review
and collaboration tool, and assessment of the current features and tools implemented in
the environment. Participants were also asked what type of additional features or tools
they would have liked to have been in the VR environment.
Qualitative data were collected during and after the test. During the test, observers
noted down statements by the participants as they were thinking aloud and discussing with
each other. After the session, further data were collected during the interview and noted
down by the facilitator and observers. The data were analyzed with thematic analysis. Due
to the small size of the test group, the statistical results are indicative only, but as domain
experts are the real experts with their own tasks, the expert evaluation carries much weight
in evaluating the usefulness and beneﬁts of the environment for industrial maintenance
tasks.
4. Results
Overall, experts left positive evaluations of collaborative reviews of technical docu-
mentation in COVE-VR. Figure 7 shows how experts perceive the value of collaborative
reviews in VR by visualizing the division of answers via minimum, maximum and median
of the answers for each statement. All experts agreed that review sessions in VR would
positively affect the company’s overall performance, would accelerate the project span,
and advance the knowledge transfer between the departments. Furthermore, eight experts
agreed that collaborative review sessions in VR would help to identify more design errors
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
12 of 20
and that a VR review session is more efﬁcient than reviews via traditional conferencing
tools. Finally, all experts agreed that review sessions in VR should be integrated to the
company’s working practices.
Figure 7. The results of collaboration-related statements, answered on a seven-point Likert scale.
The results of the SUXES survey, which compares the expectations and experiences
with the VR system, are shown in Figure 8.
 
Figure 8. Expectations and experiences with VR platform. A seven-point Likert scale was used.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
13 of 20
The survey results show that for most of the statements, the expectations of subject
matter experts were met. They also demonstrate the overall positive evaluation of the
system’s usability. Most of the experts found the system to be fast, pleasant, clear, easy
to learn and natural to use, with a median at 5. In addition, all the participants found
it to be useful. However, for about half of the experts, using the application was not
effortless. The decrease between expectations and experiences happens in two statements—
the experts expected the application to function less error-freely than experienced. In
addition, less enthusiasm was demonstrated towards using the application in the future
after experiencing it; however, no expert showed a negative attitude to this statement.
Figure 9 demonstrates how experts evaluated the DocPanel tool. The tool was found
to be useful for the review processes and easy to use. In addition, experts believed that the
tool would positively affect the collaborative review process and make it easier, faster, and
more efﬁcient. The results also show that the tools should be further advanced in terms of
design and interactions.
Figure 9. Evaluation of the DocPanel tool for collaborative review in VR. A seven-point Likert scale
was used.
The usefulness and beneﬁts of VR technology to facilitate the collaborative review
of technical documentation and the virtual tools were discussed in a semi-structured
group interview. Despite the main focus of the interview being the DocPanel tool and
the feasibility of the review process in VR, the participants were very engaged and gave
many comments and improvement ideas on the other tools and the multiuser collaboration
in general.
The concept of the DocPanel tool was evaluated as very useful by experts participating
in the user testing. When reviewing technical instructions, one must have access to the
actual document ﬁles; therefore, the instructions must be available in the VR. Participants
were able to use the DocPanel tool and review the instructions in it while checking the com-
ponents in VR. However, participants suggested several functionalities and improvements
to the DocPanel tool that would enhance the review process in VR. Firstly, better navigation
features would be needed. The DocPanel tool had basic next and back functionalities, but
all participants agreed that a navigation pane or table of contents would be needed to obtain
a comprehensive view of the instructions and to easily navigate to different parts of the
instructions. With the next and back buttons, you can move inside one task, but navigating
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
14 of 20
to a completely different part of the instruction is very cumbersome and laborious with
them. The DocPanel had page numbers, but some participants commented that a progress bar
would be a more suitable indicator of the progress made while reviewing a task. Secondly,
all documentation experts commented on the need for markup or annotation tools for the
DocPanel. The TextBox tool was used to take the notes, but as one could not attach a
note to a speciﬁc page or a task in the DocPanel, it was thought of as quite clumsy. Users
commented that attaching notes in the same way as with the commenting features in Adobe
Acrobat would be a good addition to the DocPanel tool. Thirdly, users liked the idea of
a ﬂoating window that you can move freely in the virtual environment. However, some
users commented that the window was too small, and they would like it to be resizable so
that you can freely decide what size suits you the best.
The participants discussed multiuser VR collaboration in length and agreed that it
enhances both the documentation review process and the risk assessment process when
compared to the current practices. The participants noticed an increased level of social
presence and concentration on the task. Despite being physically located in different parts
of the country or the world, the participants noted that VR would give a sense of being in
the same room. One participant commented the following: “This is much more visual than
the current process. You are forced to participate; you can’t read emails and so forth at the same
time, but you have to concentrate on the task at hand.” The participants also suggested that
desktop-based access to VR would be beneﬁcial, calling people participating this way silent
members or observers. The desktop participants would be then able to follow the review
process in VR and also possibly take notes. One documentation expert suggested that
an observer could be the one taking notes in the instructions outside of the VR in, for
example, the PDF ﬁle. The VR participants would be then able to concentrate on reading
and reviewing the instructions in the DocPanel tool, and already existing tools would be
used to annotate and mark up the ﬁle by an observer. This type of hybrid setup would
offer an easy adoption of VR, as good commenting tools already exist. However, it would
require that an extra person is always available as an observer taking notes, which might
prove problematic resourcing-wise. One documentation expert noted that if the session was
recorded, they could watch it afterwards and make the needed changes in the instructions
while watching the recording.
All the test participants agreed that even though COVE-VR would be useful for
documentation review, you cannot review very long instructions in it but need to take
breaks in between. Reviewing the whole instructions (e.g., the overview of the whole
maintenance of a certain component) in VR would take quite some time with frequent
breaks. Furthermore, many participants commented that documentation review in VR
would mostly beneﬁt the early draft reviews and entirely new tasks where you concentrate
more on a speciﬁc task.
The participants agreed that risk assessments in VR would enhance the current process
where the equipment to be risk assessed is not always available or accessible. They noted
that it would be especially good for early risk assessments when the actual physical proto-
types rarely exist. However, from a risk assessment point of view, the whole equipment
needs to be modelled in VR in a way that it can be interacted with. In our tests, only certain
components were modelled in such a way, and the risk assessment experts commented
that you have to be able to interact with the full model or then have a blank virtual room
with just the component you are reviewing in it. The risk assessment process takes the
surroundings and environment into account, and the risk assessment for the method for
replacing a component, for example, is seldom carried out on its own but rather reviewed
in the context. Risk assessment experts also commented that haptic gloves and motion
feedback would enhance the user experience, as you could also feel the objects you are
touching. They also discussed the importance of importing standard maintenance tools,
such as screwdrivers and wrenches, into the VR environment because the use of the tools is
also considered in the risk assessment. The risk assessment experts also commented on the
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
15 of 20
use of personal protective equipment and how it would be important to be able to model
that in VR.
All the test participants commented on the need of a pointer tool to point out objects
to others. In addition to the DocPanel navigation improvements, the pointer was the
most requested enhancement proposal from the participants regardless of their role in the
tests. One participant started using the measure tool as a pointer, placing it on objects he
was talking about and stated the following: “Are you others able to see where I am pointing
with this?” This further indicates that there is a great need for a pointer tool, and it would
considerably enhance the collaboration in a multiuser VR environment. One test participant
suggested that color-coded pointers would make it easy for everybody to recognize who
is showing something. In addition, maintenance method developers asked for arrow
and freeform drawing tools, as they would make it easier to explain details to others.
Some participants also noted that a magnifying glass would be good so that details could
be enlarged.
The participants enjoyed the multiuser collaboration in VR. They said that the avatars
made it evident that they were not alone at the virtual equipment even though not every-
body talked at the same time. However, several participants noted that realistic avatars
with real faces would be good and would further enhance the collaboration and feeling of
being in the same space, stating the following: “Avatars with real faces would be great, you
would recognize people.” Some suggested that the Ofﬁce365 picture of the persons could
be used as the avatar as that is something they are used to viewing and would recognize
immediately. Avatar heads used in COVE-VR were also viewed as too large and smaller
ones would be good as the current heads get in the way of seeing things, especially in a
cramped space with many concurrent users. Finally, the participants noted that “the VR is
not a replacement for real equipment but a good addition”.
5. Discussion
This article presented the results of an expert case study on enhancing maintenance
documentation review and risk assessment processes with the use of collaborative virtual
reality. The study addressed the actual challenges in the industry, where access to physical
equipment is limited or non-existent and experts work in different locations and are, many
times, unable to meet face-to-face. Since the beginning of the 1990’s, many academic
and industrial studies have demonstrated the value of VR for industrial operations in
various ﬁelds [7,16,25,50]. However, even though the use of VR has been promoted in
industrial companies, its main application areas in companies are still training and design
reviews. Our study demonstrates that the use of VR can also enhance other research and
development related processes in industrial companies. Previously, the cost of the hardware
was noted as the greatest obstacle for VR adoption in companies [9], but as prices have
come down considerably during the past few years, this is not a major issue any more and
companies are investing more in VR and related equipment. Furthermore, for companies
where VR technology has been already adopted, e.g., for training purposes, the integration
of other processes and use cases for VR would be fairly easy to achieve. Exploring all the
possible potential VR scenarios based on existing hardware would also boost the adoption
of industry 4.0 interventions.
5.1. Beneﬁts of VR to Collaboration and Inclusiveness
Previous studies reported that VR enhances communication and collaboration ac-
tivities [23,26,51]. Accordingly, our study demonstrates that the greatest advantage of
virtual reality for the maintenance documentation review and risk assessment processes is
its positive effect on the collaboration of the team working together towards a common
goal. Instead of people working independently and alone at their desktops or joining
conference calls, VR offers them a collaboration platform where they have, despite of their
physical location, a sense of being together in the same room [21,22,47,52]. Not only does
VR enhance the current collaboration process by offering virtual access to equipment that
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
16 of 20
is not available [4], it also promotes inclusiveness, as additional team members from other
countries can easily join documentation review and risk assessment sessions from their
own locations. The beneﬁts of multiuser VR are evident when comparing it to the current
practice of reviewing and commenting technical instructions (in PDF ﬁles or by attending
conference calls in tools such as MS Teams), which are not thought of as very collaborative.
Furthermore, when comparing to physically being present in the same meeting room,
remote participation through multiuser VR enables diverse experts from other countries to
engage without a need to travel and physically attend meetings. This is both a clear beneﬁt
for globally operating companies and their employees from both a cost and sustainability
point of view. VR also provides more equal opportunities globally and facilitates viewpoints
from globally scattered team members, beneﬁting both the multi-national company and its
employees. Lifelike, realistic avatars would further improve the sense of togetherness and
working as a team, as people would be easily recognized in VR [53].
5.2. Beneﬁts of Collaborative VR to Documentation Review and Risk Assesment
The results of our user testing demonstrate that the concept of documentation review
and risk assessment in VR was rated positively by the participants. Our concept was
tested with the COVE-VR platform, but any collaborative VR environment with similar
tools would offer an efﬁcient platform for maintenance documentation review and risk
assessment processes. The DocPanel tool offers the ability to test maintenance methods and
concurrently review the technical instructions, even when there is no physical equipment
available. In comparison to working independently with ﬁles on a laptop, collaborative
VR offers the ability to show how a task is performed, to point out components, and to
demonstrate their functionalities. It also introduces an enhanced sense of being together
and working as a team. The user test participants noted that the combination of people
and departments in our tests was good, but clear roles are needed so that everybody
knows what to do. For example, before a review session starts, it must be deﬁned who is
responsible for operating the DocPanel and leading the documentation review and who
takes notes of any needed changes.
Spatial understanding is essential for many industrial processes [54]. For example, in
maintenance method development, it is important to understand whether there is enough
space to carry out the maintenance task. The sense of scale is easily lost when looking
at the 3D model from computer screen, which can lead to maintenance methods that are
impossible to perform. The related maintenance instructions are then impossible to follow,
which can then both frustrate the users and cause safety issues when the users invent their
own way of performing the task. These kinds of mistakes are avoided with the 1:1 scale in
VR, as VR creates a sense of spatial understanding.
5.3. Limitations of Collaborative VR in Documetation Review and Risk Assesment
Some limitations still exist in fully using VR for maintenance documentation review
and risk assessment processes. Most of the user test participants noted that reviews in
VR would be good for early drafts and early risk assessments. However, the 3D model
might not be always ready and available in very early phases of product development.
Further focus needs to be given, therefore, to integrating the early creation of 3D models to
the product development process. Additionally, as the 3D model is often updated during
the product development cycles, it would also be essential to easily update the VR model
when there are changes in the 3D model. Additionally, it would be beneﬁcial if the VR
environment would be able to indicate the changes made in the 3D model so that recent
changes can be easily noticed.
The quality of immersion and sense of presence improve the ability to identify risks.
The modelling of tools and animating the movement of objects proposed in the results of
this study agree well with other studies [40]. One problem for risk assessment in VR is that
the environment is typically ’clean’, with no odors, no noise, no temperatures, or equivalent.
Hazard identiﬁcation is based only on the visual observation of environment [41]. Therefore,
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
17 of 20
people performing risk assessment need to be aware of and competent enough to identify
hidden hazards.
To improve the situation, we propose the following to enhance VR hazard identiﬁca-
tion: objects must have hazard-related metadata attached to them. This data can be made
visible as an additional visualization layer that can be switched on and off. For example,
objects connected to voltage sources could have a blue aura or shimmering, objects with
chemical hazards a yellow aura, and hot objects a red aura. Different visualization, or audio
feedback, if available, could be given similarly to any hazard, be it of mechanical origin,
irradiation, pressure and so on.
Even though the concept of the DocPanel was rated positively, its implementation
had its limitations. For the DocPanel to be an efﬁcient tool, enhancements and additions
would be needed especially in navigation and annotation tools. As people are used to
the current navigation and commenting functionalities of common ofﬁce tools, such as
Adobe Acrobat and MS Word, replicating those in DocPanel would lower the learning
curve for the users of COVE-VR. From a multiuser collaboration point of view, a pointer
tool would be essential. Maintenance method developers, documentation experts and risk
assessment experts discuss details when reviewing instructions and assessing risks, and
many times need to point out a small detail. In real life, with access to real equipment, this
would be carried out with a ﬁnger, and all the participants looked for a way of pointing a
detail or component to others in VR. In addition, drawing tools would further enhance the
collaboration features of COVE-VR. The development of the DocPanel and the related tools
and their usefulness to the processes described in this paper would offer an interesting
further research area.
5.4. Limitations of This Study and Areas of Further Research
This study’s limitation is the focus on a single industrial company’s documentation
and risk assessment processes. However, documentation review and risk assessment are
universal processes in industrial companies on a general level, and even if the details of
the process may vary from one company to another, the processes are still collaborative by
nature. Studying other companies’ processes and the usefulness of VR to those processes
would offer further insight into how generalizable the results of this study are to the ﬁelds
of documentation review and risk assessment. Additionally, the potential enhancements to
the VR environment and tools suggested by the experts in our user study would offer an
interesting development and further research area for collaborative VR.
6. Conclusions
Even though virtual reality environments are already in active use in many industrial
companies, their use has been mainly focused on training or design reviews. However, VR
has much to offer to other functions and product development departments, especially in
the case of globally operating companies and globally scattered teams.
This study explored the beneﬁts of VR to maintenance documentation review and
risk assessment processes. The concept of reviews in VR and the DocPanel tool were
evaluated by an industrial company’s domain experts in user tests. Overall, our study
indicates the potential of VR as a tool to enhance maintenance documentation review and
risk assessment processes. Even though the focus of this study was on a single industrial
company’s documentation and risk assessment processes, the processes are universal
processes used in other industrial companies as well. Therefore, the results are largely
generalizable to other industrial companies and their processes. We used the COVE-VR
platform in our study, but our any collaborative VR environment with similar tools would
offer an efﬁcient platform for maintenance documentation review and risk assessment.
The study demonstrates that VR had a positive effect on the collaboration of the
cross-organizational team working towards a common goal. In globally operating multi-
national companies where experts work in different locations and are, many times, unable
to meet face-to-face, VR offers a collaboration platform, strengthens the sense of being
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
18 of 20
part of a team, and promotes inclusiveness. It also gives virtual access to equipment in
cases where the physical prototype does not exist or is inaccessible to the members of the
team. VR also strengthens spatial understanding, and, therefore, results in more accurate
maintenance methods and related maintenance instructions. Even though reviews in VR
were not viewed as a replacement for documentation review and risk assessment processes
regarding real equipment, VR was rated a very useful alternative in cases where access to
the physical equipment is limited or non-existent.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.H., A.B., S.S. and M.T.; methodology, H.H., A.B. and
S.S.; software, A.B., validation, J.H., S.S. and M.T.; formal analysis, H.H. and A.B.; investigation,
H.H., A.B. and S.S.; resources, S.S. and M.T.; data curation, H.H. and A.B.; writing—original draft
preparation, H.H., A.B., S.S. and J.L.; writing—review and editing, H.H., A.B., S.S., J.L., J.H. and
M.T.; visualization, H.H. and A.B.; supervision, S.S. and M.T.; project administration, S.S. and M.T.;
funding acquisition, S.S. and M.T. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Business Finland Human Optimized XR (HUMOR)
co-innovation project, grant number # 3913/31/2019.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We would like to warmly thank the global employees of KONE for participating
in the user testing and providing their valuable insight. We also thank John Mäkelä and Kimmo
Ronkainen from Tampere University for their contribution to the software development of COVE-VR.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
KONE Corporation—Improving the Flow of Urban Life. Available online: https://www.kone.com/en/ (accessed on 20 June 2022).
2.
Hackos, J.T. Managing Your Documentation Projects; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 1994.
3.
Jayaprakash, S. Technical Writing; Himalaya: Mumbai, India, 2008.
4.
Stock, I.; Weber, M.; Steinmeier, E. Metadata based authoring for technical documentation. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
International Conference on Design of Communication Documenting & Designing for Pervasive Information—SIGDOC ’05,
Coventry, UK, 21–23 September 2005; ACM Press: Coventry, UK, 2005; p. 60.
5.
Wolfartsberger, J. Analyzing the Potential of Virtual Reality for Engineering Design Review. Autom. Constr. 2019, 104, 27–37.
[CrossRef]
6.
Choi, S.S.; Jo, H.; Boehm, S.; Sang, D.N. ONESVIEW: An Integrated System for One-Stop Virtual Design Review. Concurr. Eng.
2010, 18, 75–91. [CrossRef]
7.
Guo, Z.; Zhou, D.; Zhou, Q.; Zhang, X.; Geng, J.; Zeng, S.; Lv, C.; Hao, A. Applications of Virtual Reality in Maintenance during
the Industrial Product Lifecycle: A Systematic Review. J. Manuf. Syst. 2020, 56, 525–538. [CrossRef]
8.
Narasimha, S.; Dixon, E.; Bertrand, J.W.; Chalil Madathil, K. An Empirical Study to Investigate the Efﬁcacy of Collaborative
Immersive Virtual Reality Systems for Designing Information Architecture of Software Systems. Appl. Ergon. 2019, 80, 175–186.
[CrossRef]
9.
Zaker, R.; Coloma, E. Virtual Reality-Integrated Workﬂow in BIM-Enabled Projects Collaboration and Design Review: A Case
Study. Vis. Eng. 2018, 6, 4. [CrossRef]
10.
Murray, N.; Fernando, T.; Aouad, G. A Virtual Environment for the Design and Simulated Construction of Prefabricated Buildings.
Virtual Real. 2003, 6, 244–256. [CrossRef]
11.
Ben Hadj, R.; Trigui, M.; Aifaoui, N. Toward an Integrated CAD Assembly Sequence Planning Solution. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng.
Part C J. Mech. Eng. Sci. 2015, 229, 2987–3001. [CrossRef]
12.
Schwarz, S.; Regal, G.; Kempf, M.; Schatz, R. Learning success in immersive virtual reality training environments: Practical
evidence from automotive assembly. In Proceedings of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping
Experiences, Shaping Society, Tallinn, Estonia, 25 October 2020; pp. 1–11.
13.
Andaluz, V.H.; Sánchez, J.S.; Sánchez, C.R.; Quevedo, W.X.; Varela, J.; Morales, J.L.; Cuzco, G. Multi-user industrial training
and education environment. In Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, and Computer Graphics; De Paolis, L.T., Bourdot, P., Eds.;
Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; Volume 10851, pp. 533–546.
ISBN 978-3-319-95281-9.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
19 of 20
14.
Burova, A.; Mäkelä, J.; Hakulinen, J.; Keskinen, T.; Heinonen, H.; Siltanen, S.; Turunen, M. Utilizing VR and Gaze Tracking to
Develop AR Solutions for Industrial Maintenance. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21 April 2020; pp. 1–13.
15.
Pfeiffer-Leßmann, N.; Pfeiffer, T. ExProtoVAR: A Lightweight Tool for Experience-Focused Prototyping of Augmented Reality
Applications Using Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the HCI International 2018—Posters’ Extended Abstracts, Las Vegas, NV,
USA, 15–20 July 2018; Stephanidis, C., Ed.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 311–318.
16.
Berg, L.P.; Vance, J.M. An Industry Case Study: Investigating Early Design Decision Making in Virtual Reality. J. Comput. Inf. Sci.
Eng. 2016, 17, 011001. [CrossRef]
17.
Wolfartsberger, J.; Zenisek, J.; Sievi, C.; Silmbroth, M. A Virtual Reality Supported 3D Environment for Engineering Design
Review. In Proceedings of the 2017 23rd International Conference on Virtual System & Multimedia (VSMM), Dublin, Ireland,
31 October–4 November 2017; pp. 1–8.
18.
Berni, A.; Borgianni, Y. Applications of Virtual Reality in Engineering and Product Design: Why, What, How, When and Where.
Electronics 2020, 9, 1064. [CrossRef]
19.
De Silva, R.K.J.; Rupasinghe, T.D.; Apeagyei, P. A Collaborative Apparel New Product Development Process Model Using Virtual
Reality and Augmented Reality Technologies as Enablers. Int. J. Fash. Des. Technol. Educ. 2019, 12, 1–11. [CrossRef]
20.
Churchill, E.F.; Snowdon, D. Collaborative Virtual Environments: An Introductory Review of Issues and Systems. Virtual Real.
1998, 3, 3–15. [CrossRef]
21.
Bailey, J.O.; Bailenson, J.N. Virtual Reality and Collaboration; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2014.
22.
Du, J.; Shi, Y.; Zou, Z.; Zhao, D. CoVR: Cloud-Based Multiuser Virtual Reality Headset System for Project Communication of
Remote Users. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2018, 144, 04017109. [CrossRef]
23.
Abbas, A.; Choi, M.; Seo, J.; Cha, S.H.; Li, H. Effectiveness of Immersive Virtual Reality-Based Communication for Construction
Projects. KSCE J. Civ. Eng. 2019, 23, 4972–4983. [CrossRef]
24.
Lepola, A.; Hannu, K.; Jalo, H.; Torro, O. Collaborative Virtual Reality as an Adaptable Boundary Object in the Design Phase of
Facility Life Cycle. In Proceedings of the 12th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engineering
and Knowledge Management, Budapest, Hungary, 2–4 November 2022; SCITEPRESS-Science and Technology Publications:
Setúbal, Portugal, 2020; Volume 3, pp. 63–75.
25.
Tea, S.; Panuwatwanich, K.; Ruthankoon, R.; Kaewmoracharoen, M. Multiuser Immersive Virtual Reality Application for Real-
Time Remote Collaboration to Enhance Design Review Process in the Social Distancing Era. J. Eng. Des. Technol. 2022, 20, 281–298.
[CrossRef]
26.
Wolfartsberger, J.; Zenisek, J.; Wild, N. Supporting Teamwork in Industrial Virtual Reality Applications. Procedia Manuf. 2020,
42, 2–7. [CrossRef]
27.
Becerril Palma, P. Enhancing Lean and Agile Ways of Working Using an Asymmetric Multi-User Virtual Reality Setup. Master’s
Thesis, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland, 2021.
28.
Gamlin, A.; Breedon, P.; Medjdoub, B. Immersive virtual reality deployment in a lean manufacturing environment. In Proceedings
of the 2014 International Conference on Interactive Technologies and Games, Nottingham, UK, 16–17 October 2014; pp. 51–58.
29.
Nevo, S.; Chengalur-Smith, I. Enhancing the Performance of Software Development Virtual Teams through the Use of Agile
Methods: A Pilot Study. In Proceedings of the 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Kauai, HI, USA,
4–7 January 2011; pp. 1–10.
30.
Schäfer, A.; Reis, G.; Stricker, D. A Survey on Synchronous Augmented, Virtual and Mixed Reality Remote Collaboration Systems.
ArXiv 2021, arXiv:210205998. [CrossRef]
31.
Siltanen, S.; Heinonen, H.; Burova, A.; Turunen, M. Reimagining Innovation for Remote, Distributed Teams with Collaborative
Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the ISPIM “Reconnect, Rediscover, Reimagine”, Valencia, Spain, 29 November–1 December 2021;
pp. 1–14.
32.
Deﬁning Technical Communication. Available online: https://www.stc.org/about-stc/deﬁning-technical-communication/
(accessed on 15 May 2022).
33.
Scholz, J. Developing Technical Documentation the Smart Way. Technol. Commun. 1994, 41, 94–99.
34.
Pringle, A.S.; O’Keefe, S. Technical Writing 101: A Real-World Guide to Planning and Writing Technical Documentation; Scriptorium
Press: Research Triangle Park, NC, USA, 2000; ISBN 978-0-9704733-0-1.
35.
Directive 2006/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on Machinery, and Amending Directive
95/16/EC (Recast). Off. J. Eur. Union 2006, 49, L157.
36.
Directive 2014/33/EU—Lifts and Safety Components for Lifts (Recast) | Safety and Health at Work EU-OSHA. Available
online: https://osha.europa.eu/en/legislation/directive/directive-201433eu-lifts-and-safety-components-lifts-recast (accessed
on 18 May 2022).
37.
EN 13015:2001+A1:2008—Maintenance for Lifts and Escalators—Rules for Maintenance Instructions.
Available online:
https://standards.iteh.ai/catalog/standards/cen/07ca9a23-173d-445a-839e-65a429305ab6/en-13015-2001a1-2008 (accessed
on 18 May 2022).
38.
14:00–17:00 ISO 12100:2010. Available online: https://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/standard/
05/15/51528.html (accessed on 18 May 2022).
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 7155
20 of 20
39.
14:00–17:00 ISO 14798:2009. Available online: https://www.iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/standard/
04/60/46048.html (accessed on 18 May 2022).
40.
Puschmann, P.; Horlitz, T.; Wittstock, V.; Schütz, A. Risk Analysis (Assessment) Using Virtual Reality Technology—Effects of
Subjective Experience: An Experimental Study. Procedia CIRP 2016, 50, 490–495. [CrossRef]
41.
Slezak, R.J.; Keren, N.; Finseth, T. Virtual Reality Application for Enhancing Risk Assessment Skills. In Proceedings of the Interser-
vice/Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference (I/ITSEC), Orlando, FL, USA, 26 November 2018. Paper No. 18280.
42.
Da Silva, A.G.; Mendes Gomes, M.V.; Winkler, I. Virtual Reality and Digital Human Modeling for Ergonomic Assessment in
Industrial Product Development: A Patent and Literature Review. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 1084. [CrossRef]
43.
Barkokebas, R.; Ritter, C.; Sirbu, V.; Li, X.; Al-Hussein, M. Application of Virtual Reality in Task Training in the Construction
Manufacturing Industry. ISARC Proc. 2019, 36, 796–803.
44.
De-Juan-Ripoll, C.; Soler-Domínguez, J.L.; Guixeres, J.; Contero, M.; Álvarez Gutiérrez, N.; Alcañiz, M. Virtual Reality as a New
Approach for Risk Taking Assessment. Front. Psychol. 2018, 9, 2532. [CrossRef]
45.
Leder, J.; Horlitz, T.; Puschmann, P.; Wittstock, V.; Schütz, A. Comparing Immersive Virtual Reality and Powerpoint as Methods
for Delivering Safety Training: Impacts on Risk Perception, Learning, and Decision Making. Saf. Sci. 2019, 111, 271–286.
[CrossRef]
46.
Burova, A.; Heinonen, H.; Becerril Palma, P.; Keskinen, T.; Hakulinen, J.; Opas, V.; Mäkelä, J.; Ronkainen, K.; Siltanen, S.; Raisamo,
R. Toward Efﬁcient Academia-Industry Collaboration: A Case Study of Joint VR System Development. In Proceedings of the
Academic Mindtrek 2021 (Mindtrek ’21), Tampere, Finland, 1–3 June 2021; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2021; pp. 176–185.
47.
Burova, A.; Palma, P.B.; Truong, P.; Mäkelä, J.; Heinonen, H.; Hakulinen, J.; Ronkainen, K.; Raisamo, R.; Turunen, M.; Siltanen, S.
Distributed Asymmetric Virtual Reality in Industrial Context: Enhancing the Collaboration of Geographically Dispersed Teams
in the Pipeline of Maintenance Method Development and Technical Documentation Creation. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 3728. [CrossRef]
48.
Burova, A.; Mäkelä, J.; Heinonen, H.; Palma, P.B.; Hakulinen, J.; Opas, V.; Siltanen, S.; Raisamo, R.; Turunen, M. Asynchronous
Industrial Collaboration: How Virtual Reality and Virtual Tools Aid the Process of Maintenance Method Development and
Documentation Creation. Comput. Ind. 2022, 140, 103663. [CrossRef]
49.
Turunen, M.; Hakulinen, J.; Melto, A.; Heimonen, T.; Keskinen, T.; Hella, J. SUXES—User Experience Evaluation Method for
Spoken and Multimodal Interaction. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association, Brighton, UK, 6–10 September 2009.
50.
Clergeaud, D.; Roo, J.S.; Hachet, M.; Guitton, P. Towards Seamless Interaction between Physical and Virtual Locations for
Asymmetric Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, Gothenburg,
Sweden, 8 November 2017; pp. 1–4.
51.
Bleakley, A.; Wade, V.; Cowan, B.R. Finally a Case for Collaborative VR?: The Need to Design for Remote Multi-Party Conversa-
tions. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Conversational User Interfaces, Bilbao, Spain, 22 July 2020; pp. 1–3.
52.
Ayala García, A.; Galván Bobadilla, I.; Arroyo Figueroa, G.; Pérez Ramírez, M.; Muñoz Román, J. Virtual Reality Training System
for Maintenance and Operation of High-Voltage Overhead Power Lines. Virtual Real. 2016, 20, 27–40. [CrossRef]
53.
Pakanen, M.; Alavesa, P.; van Berkel, N.; Koskela, T.; Ojala, T. “Nice to See You Virtually”: Thoughtful Design and Evaluation of
Virtual Avatar of the Other User in AR and VR Based Telexistence Systems. Entertain. Comput. 2022, 40, 100457. [CrossRef]
54.
Piumsomboon, T.; Lee, Y.; Lee, G.; Billinghurst, M. CoVAR: A Collaborative Virtual and Augmented Reality System for Remote
Collaboration. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 Emerging Technologies, Bangkok, Thailand, 27 November 2017;
pp. 1–2.
